Add images chapter to classic-ui docs (#1192)
plone/documentation: docs/classic-ui/images.md

---
html_meta:
  "description": ""
  "property=og:description": ""
  "property=og:title": ""
  "keywords": ""
---

(classic-ui-images-label)=

# Image resolving and scaling

> Image scaling is done in plone.namedfile.scaling and most interesting the ImageScaling view.

Reviewer: Where is "ImageScaling view"? What is it? This might be obvious to experienced Plone developers, but newbies have no idea.

Reviewer 2: Precondition: A (Dexterity) content type with one or more image fields (`plone.namedfile.NamedBlobImage`). `context` is an instance of this content type.

View is accessed via traversal: 
`context.restrictedTraverse("@@images/FIELDNAME")` to get the view for s specific field.

The (by default registered) view class is `plone.namedfile.scaling.ImageScaling`.

The view is 
- on one hand a tool for programmers to get reliable and cachable URLs of scales of an image of above mentioned image field, 
- on the other hand it is used as a URL in the browser like `../my.jpg/@@images/SCALEUID` or (not cachable and not recommended) like `../my.jpg/@@images/FIELDNAME/SCALENAME`.

Reviewer 2: I just found plone.api is the way to go, so forget about the traversal part. Only needed in plone core development where plone.api can not be used.

Author: restrictedTraverse is not working for this case, it's not able to resolve the image field and scale.

Reviewer: I don't think I got an answer to my original question: Where is "ImageScaling view"? What is it?

Author: it's linked now

image_scale = scale_util.scale('leadimage', scale='mini')
print(image_scale.url)  # http://localhost:8080/Plone/enl/@@images/3d182f34-8773-4f20-a79d-8774c3151b7e.jpeg
print(image_scale.width)  # 200
print(image_scale.height)  # 110
```

the most important properties:

- data
- fieldname
- height
- mimetype
- srcset
- srcset_attribute
- tag
- uid
- url
- width

You can get a tag from this point too:
```python
>>> print(image_scale.tag)

<img src="http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/9f676d46-0cb3-4512-a831-a5db4079bdfa.jpeg" alt="News Item 1!" title="News Item 1" height="21" width="32" srcset="http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/4a68513c-cffd-4de0-8a35-80627945b80f.jpeg 2x, http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/c32929c6-cb89-4ce7-846f-38adf29c09a4.jpeg 3x" />
```

or to get a specific size:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view('images', context, request)
tag = scale_util.scale('leadimage', width="600", height="200")
```

The first argument is the field name, followed by one of the following arguments:

	fieldname=None,
        scale=None,
        height=None,
        width=None,

>         direction="thumbnail",

Reviewer: If `direction` is deprecated, should we include it? Should we replace it with `mode`?

Reviewer: Also this is duplicated from earlier.

Reviewer 2: Docs should use `mode`.

Author: right now, only plone.scaling implements mode, plone.namedfile which is the main package we are dealing with here, does not yet ;). So we have to use the old direction parameter until, this is refactured.

Reviewer: OK. That makes sense by itself. However the section "Scaling `direction` deprecated in favor of `mode`" creates confusion. It appears to override everything written up to that point.

We could add [`version-changed`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-versionchanged) and [`deprecated`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-deprecated) directives to make it clear.

Author: I think we either refacture it right away or we don't mention the chnage for now, as the api of plone.namedfile has not changed yet. The rest is internal for now.

Reviewer: Let's put this section in an `attention` admonition. That will both save the content for when y'all get around to refactoring it and notify users that this change is coming. I think we can also tune the language to make it clear that it is not ready yet.

Reviewer: I pushed a commit https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1192/commits/58481e400f28d62b1ad48bdf33572b2710c6f81c that should address this.

## Scaling direction / mode

The actual scaling is done in plone.scale:
In plone scale the `direction` argument is deprecated in favor of `mode` and values are converted as follow:

direction values | mode values
-----------------|------------
scale-crop-to-fit | contain
down | contain
scale-crop-to-fill | cover
up | cover
keep | scale
thumbnail | scale

> For now plone.namedfile is still expecting the direction argument with the old values.

Reviewer: Are we supposed to use `direction="foo"` or `mode="foo"`? Also effective in which version of Plone or `plone.api`?

Reviewer 2: `mode` is the way to go. `direction` should be mentioned somewhere, it's in for backward compatibility reasons.

Reviewer 2: `mode` is available in `plone.scale` since version 3.1.0. This is not specific to `plone.api`.

Reviewer: This was resolved in https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1192/commits/58481e400f28d62b1ad48bdf33572b2710c6f81c

## Permissions

> The ImageScaling view is checking explicitly the permissions the current user has, in case you want to access objects which are normally not accessible to the current user, you have to override the validate_access method in ImageScale. In Products.EasyNewsletter you can find an example of that.

Reviewer: "In Products.EasyNewsletter you can find an example of that."

Please add hyperlink to reference.

Reviewer: I searched for [`ImageScaling` in `Products.EasyNewsletter`](https://github.com/collective/Products.EasyNewsletter/search?q=ImageScaling), but came up empty. Where is the example?

Author: i will leave it out for now, i have to make soem testing there, to make sure it is save to use. But it is in src/Products/EasyNewsletter/views/newsletter_issue_send.py, right now it's just disabling the check, which is not good. We need more control here, i want to disable it inside the view, but it should not allow anonoumus access outside that view for every image ;)

Image scaling is done in `plone.namedfile.scaling`, specifically in the `ImageScaling` view.

(classic-ui-images-image-tag-label)=

## Image tag

To get an HTML tag for a scaled image, you can use the `ImageScaling` view as follows:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag("leadimage", scale="mini")
```

To get a specific image size:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag("leadimage", width="600", height="200")
```

The complete list of arguments with their default values is shown in the following example.

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag(
    fieldname=None,
    scale=None,
    height=None,
    width=None,
    direction="thumbnail"
)
```

(classic-ui-images-image-scaling-no-tag-creation-label)=

## Image scaling without tag creation

To get the scaling information only without creating an HTML tag, you can use the `ImageScaling` view as follows:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)

> image_scale = scale_util.scale("leadimage", scale="mini")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
# on the following line "leadimage" is the field name. The default Image content types field name is "image".
image_scale = scale_util.scale("leadimage", scale="mini")
```

print(image_scale.url)
print(image_scale.width)
print(image_scale.height)
```

This will produce the following output:

```console
http://localhost:8080/Plone/enl/@@images/3d182f34-8773-4f20-a79d-8774c3151b7e.jpeg
200
110
```

The most important properties are the following:

-   `data`
-   `fieldname`
-   `height`
-   `mimetype`
-   `srcset`
-   `srcset_attribute`
-   `tag`
-   `uid`
-   `url`
-   `width`

> At this point, you can also get an HTML tag, since you have created an instance of `api.content.get_view` in `scale_util`:

Reviewer 2: The sentence twists my brain. Just:
```suggestion
You can directly create an HTML tag from `image_scale`:
```

```pycon

> >>> print(image_scale.tag)

Reviewer 2: `tag` is a method, so this won't work. see https://github.com/plone/plone.namedfile/blob/master/plone/namedfile/scaling.py#L89
```suggestion
>>> print(image_scale.tag())
```

Reviewer 2: Further it is important to document the various options of tag.

<img src="http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/9f676d46-0cb3-4512-a831-a5db4079bdfa.jpeg" alt="News Item 1!" title="News Item 1" height="21" width="32" srcset="http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/4a68513c-cffd-4de0-8a35-80627945b80f.jpeg 2x, http://localhost:8080/Plone/news/newsitem1/@@images/c32929c6-cb89-4ce7-846f-38adf29c09a4.jpeg 3x" />
```

> You can also get an HTML tag with a specific size:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of using the configured named scales you can also get an HTML tag with any specific size in pixels:
```

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)

> tag = scale_util.scale("leadimage", width="600", height="200")

Reviewer 2: One step is missing.
```suggestion
image_scale = scale_util.scale("leadimage", width="600", height="200")
image_scale.tag()

# or by shortcut
tag = scale_util.tag("leadimage", width="600", height="200")
```

Reviewer: @MrTango what do you think about this one?

Author: outdated

```

(classic-ui-images-scaling-direction-deprecated-in-favor-of-label)=

## Scaling `direction` deprecated in favor of `mode`

The actual scaling is done in `plone.scale`.
In Plone 6 in `plone.scale`, the `direction` argument is deprecated in favor of `mode`.
The values should be converted as follows:

direction values | mode values
-----------------|------------
scale-crop-to-fit | contain
down | contain
scale-crop-to-fill | cover
up | cover
keep | scale
thumbnail | scale

For now `plone.namedfile` still expects the `direction` argument with the old values.

(classic-ui-images-label)=

## Permissions

> The `ImageScaling` view explicitly checks the permissions of the current user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ImageScaling` view `@@images` is protected by the `View` permission.
```

> If you want to access objects which are normally not accessible to the current user, then you have to override the `validate_access` method in `ImageScale`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To access image scales which are normally not accessible to the current user override the `validate_access` method in `plone.namedfile.scaling.ImageScale`.
```

Given a Dexterity content type named `news-item1` with a `plone.namedfile.NamedBlobImage` field named `image`, we can use the following API's to access the image scales and manage scales.
```{note}
We will use the image object as context in the following examples.
```

## Default scales

Plone allows you in the `/@@imaging-controlpanel` to configure which scales are available and what dimensions they should have. By default we have the following scales configured:

* large 768:768
* preview 400:400
* mini 200:200
* thumb 128:128
* tile 64:64
* icon 32:32
* listing 16:16

You can add or change scale as you like.

## Image resolving by URI

Plone can resolve an image scale via URI in different ways.

### By field and scale name

Given our `news-item1` with the field `image`, we can get the name scale `thumb` as follows:

http://localhost:8080/Plone/news-item1/@@images/image/thumb

To get the original image, you can leave out the scale:

http://localhost:8080/Plone/news-item1/@@images/image

### By cacheable scale UID name

> When an image scale was created, it will be cached under the name `UID.jpeg` in the object annotations and can be resolved by it as follows:

Reviewer 2: Worth to mention its not limited to jpeg?

Reviewer: What are the possible image formats?

When an image is resized, is the resized image in `jpeg` format?

Reviewer 2: gif stays gif, png stays png, same for jpeg, just tiff gets converted to IIRC jpeg.

Reviewer 3: - png stays png
- svg stays svg
- gif becomes png
- the rest becomes jpeg

See https://github.com/plone/plone.scale/blob/a5cb08617fcd5abe3ec95f895926428e7551a8f9/plone/scale/scale.py#L63-L68

http://localhost:8080/Plone/news-item1/@@images/3d182f34-8773-4f20-a79d-8774c3151b7e.jpeg

> This very useful for caching URL's in Varnish or the Browser. In case the scale definitions have changed, they will be saved again under a different UID, so that the URL will change and enforce the Browser or a cache proxy like Varnish to fetch it again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This very useful for caching URL's in Varnish or the Browser. In case the uploaded image or scale definitions have changed, they will be saved again under a different UID, so that the URL will change and enforce the Browser or a cache proxy like Varnish to fetch it again.
```

Reviewer 2: most important: new image was uploaded.

Reviewer: Incorporated in b6c77816267f8940973a85010a4f37dc9730f58e

(classic-ui-images-image-tag-label)=

## Image tag

To get an HTML tag for a scaled image, you can use the `ImageScaling` view as follows:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag("image", scale="mini")
```

To get a specific image size:

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag("image", width="600", height="200")
```

The complete list of arguments with their default values is shown in the following example.

```python
from plone import api

scale_util = api.content.get_view("images", context, request)
tag = scale_util.tag(
    fieldname=None,
    scale=None,
    height=None,
    width=None,
    direction="thumbnail"

> )

Reviewer 2: I think here we should mention, additional kwargs are ending up as attributes on the tag.
https://github.com/plone/plone.namedfile/blob/ecf33a2bc7a8c61888909bc383b3e08d80888e43/plone/namedfile/scaling.py#L123

Reviewer: Incorporated suggestion in b6c77816267f8940973a85010a4f37dc9730f58e

```{note}
We will use the image object as context in the following examples.
```

(classic-ui-images-default-scales-label)=

## Default scales

In `/@@imaging-controlpanel` Plone allows you to configure which scales are available and what dimensions they should have. By default we have the following scales configured:

* large 768:768
* preview 400:400
* mini 200:200
* thumb 128:128
* tile 64:64
* icon 32:32
* listing 16:16

You can add or change scales as you like.

(classic-ui-images-image-resolving-by-uri-label)=

## Image resolving by URI

Plone can resolve an image scale via URI in different ways.

(classic-ui-images-by-field-and-scale-name-label)=

### By field and scale name

Given our `news-item1` with the field `image`, we can get the name scale `thumb` as follows:

`http://localhost:8080/Plone/news-item1/@@images/image/thumb`

To get the original image, you can leave out the scale:

`http://localhost:8080/Plone/news-item1/@@images/image`

(classic-ui-images-by-cacheable-scale-uid-name-label)=

### By cacheable scale UID name

> When an image scale is created, it will be cached under the name `UID.jpeg` in the object annotations.
> It can be resolved as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an image scale is created, it will be cached under the name `UID.EXT` (i.e. `f4c34254b44ba351af7393bfe0296664.jpeg`) in the object annotations.
Scaling keeps the uploaded formats, except for TIFF which ends up as JPEG.
It can be resolved as follows:
```

---
html_meta:
  "description": "Image resolution and scaling in Plone Classic UI"
  "property=og:description": "Image resolution and scaling in Plone Classic UI"
  "property=og:title": "Image resolving and scaling"
  "keywords": "Plone, Classic UI, classic-ui, image, resize, scale"
---

> ****

Reviewer: Not sure where these came from.

```suggestion

```
